---
---
[Writing in College](index.html)
================================

by Joseph M. Williams and Lawrence McEnerney

*Part I* Some crucial differences between high school and college writing
-------------------------------------------------------------------------

_The original of this document was found on the Web at
<http://writing-program.uchicago.edu/resources/collegewriting/high_school_v_college.htm>.  It no longer appears to be available._

> ------------------------------------------------------------------------

### From high school to college

Some students make very smooth transitions from writing in high school
to writing in college, and we heartily wish all of you an easy passage.
But other students are puzzled and frustrated by their experiences in
writing for college classes. Only months earlier your writing was
winning praise; now your instructors are dissatisfied, saying that the
writing isn't quite "there" yet, saying that the writing is "lacking
something." You haven't changed---your writing is still mechanically
sound, your descriptions are accurate, you're saying smart things. But
they're still not happy. Some of the criticism is easy to understand:
it's easy to predict that standards at college are going to be higher
than in high school. But it is not just a matter of higher standards:
Often, what your instructors are asking of you is not just something
*better*, but something *different*. If that's the case, then you
won't succeed merely by being more intelligent or more skillful at
doing what you did in high school. Instead, you'll need to direct your
skills and your intelligence to a new task.

We should note here that a college is a big place and that you'll be
asked to use writing to fulfill different tasks. You'll find occasions
where you'll succeed by summarizing a reading accurately and showing
that you understand it. There may be times when you're invited to use
writing to react to a reading, speculate about it. Far more often---like
every other week---you will be asked to *analyze* the reading, to make a
worthwhile *claim* about it that is not obvious (*state a thesis* means
almost the same thing), to support your claim with good reasons, all in
four or five pages that are organized to present an *argument* . (If you
did that in high school, write your teachers a letter of gratitude.)

> ------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Argument: a key feature of college writing

Now by "argument" we do not mean a dispute over a loud stereo. In
college, an argument is something less contentious and more systematic:
It is a set of statements coherently arranged to offer three things that
experienced readers expect in essays that they judge to be thoughtful:

-   They expect to see a *claim* that would encourage them to say,
    "That's interesting. I'd like to know more."
-   They expect to see *evidence, reasons* for your claim, evidence that
    would encourage them to agree with your claim, or at least to think
    it plausible.
-   They expect to see that you've thought about *limits* and
    *objections* to your claim. Almost by definition, an interesting
    claim is one that can be reasonably challenged. Readers look for
    answers to questions like "But what about . . . ?" and "Have you
    considered . . . ?"

This kind of argument is less like disagreeable wrangling, more like an
amiable and lively conversation with someone whom you respect and who
respects you; someone who is interested in what you have to say, but
will not agree with your claims just because you state them; someone who
wants to hear your reasons for believing your claims and also wants to
hear answers to their questions.

At this point, some students ask why they should be required to
*convince* anyone of anything. "After all," they say, "we are all
entitled to our opinions, so all we should have to do is express them
clearly. Here's my opinion. Take it or leave it." This point of view
both misunderstands the nature of argument and ignores its greatest
value.

It is true that we are all entitled to our opinions and that we have no
duty to defend them. But universities hold as their highest value not
just the pursuit of new knowledge and better understanding, but the
sharing of that knowledge. We write not only to state what we have think
but also to show why others might agree with it and why it matters. We
also know that whatever it is we think, it is never the entire truth.
Our conclusions are partial, incomplete, and always subject to
challenge. So we write in a way that allows others to test our
reasoning: we present our best thinking as a series of claims, reasons,
and responses to imagined challenges, so that readers can see not only
what we think, but whether they ought to agree.

And that's all an argument is---not wrangling, but a serious and
focused conversation among people who are intensely interested in
getting to the bottom of things *cooperatively*.

Those values are also an integral part of your education in college. For
four years, you are asked to read, do research, gather data, analyze it,
think about it, and then communicate it to readers in a form in which
enables them to asses it and use it. You are asked to do this not
because we expect you all to become professional scholars, but because
in just about any profession you pursue, you will do research, think
about what you find, make decisions about complex matters, and then
explain those decisions---usually in writing---to others who have a
stake in your decisions being sound ones. In an Age of Information, what
most professionals do is research, think, and make arguments. (And part
of the value of doing your own thinking and writing is that it makes you
much better at evaluating the thinking and writing of others.)

In the next few pages, we're going to walk you through a process of
creating an argument in a Humanities or Social Science paper. Note that
we're describing "a" process and not "the" process. We're not
describing the way that everyone does go about writing an argument.
We're certainly not describing the way everyone must go about writing
an argument. Further, we can't cover everything, and some of your
teachers will expect something other than what we describe here. There
are even some differences between how you write papers in Humanities and
in the Social Sciences. But within all these limits, we can lay some
groundwork for writing college papers.

We begin with the assignment that gets you started; then we discuss some
ways to plan your paper so that you don't waste too much time on false
starts. We conclude with some strategies for drafting and revising,
especially revising, because the most productive work on a paper begins
after you have gotten your ideas out of the warm and cozy incubator of
your own mind and into the cold light of day.

> ------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Interpreting assignments: a guide to professors' expectations

Not all of your instructors will be equally clear about what they expect
of your paper. Some will tell you in detail what to read, how to think
about it, and how to organize your paper, but others will ask a general
question just to see what you can do with it. Some instructors will
expect you to stay close to the assignment, penalizing you if you depart
from it; others will encourage you to strike out on your own. Some few
instructors may want you to demonstrate only that you have read and
understood a reading, but most will want you to use your understanding
of the reading as a jumping-off point for an analysis and an argument.

So your first step in writing an assigned paper occurs well before you
begin writing: You must know what your instructor expects. Start by
assuming that, unless you see the words "Summarize or paraphrase what X
says about . . . ," your instructor is unlikely to want just a summary.
Beyond this point, however, you have to become a kind of anthropologist,
reading the culture of your particular class to understand what is said,
what is not, and what is intended.

Start by looking carefully at the words of the assignment. If it is
phrased in any of these ways, one crucial part of your task has been
done for you:

-   "Agree or disagree: 'Freud misunderstood the feminine mind when he
    wrote . . . .'"
-   "Was Lear justified in castigating Cordelia when she refused to . .
    .?"
-   "Discuss whether Socrates adequately answered the charge that he
    corrupted the youth of Athens."

For questions like these, you start (but it's only a start) by
considering two opposing claims: Freud understood the feminine mind or
did not , Lear was or was not justified, Socrates did or did not answer
the charges against him. For reasons we will discuss below, you will
*not* want the claim of your paper to be merely yes or no, he did or he
didn't. But an assignment like this can make it easier to get started
because you can immediately begin to find and assess data from your
readings. You can look at passages from the reading and consider how
they would support one of the claims. (Remember: this is only a start.
You do not want to end up with a claim that says nothing more than
"Freud did (or did not) understand the feminine mind." "Lear was (or was
not) justified in castigating Cordelia." "Socrates did (or did not)
adequately answer the charge.")

More likely, however, your assignments will be less specific. They
won't suggest opposite claims. Instead, they'll give you a reasonably
specific sense of subject matter and a reasonably specific sense of your
task:

> "illustrate," "explain," "analyze," "evaluate," "compare and
> contrast,"
>
> Discuss the role that the honor plays in *The Odyssey.*
>
> "Show how Moli√®re exploits comic patterns in a scene from *Tartuffe*."

None of these assignments implies a main point or claim that you can
directly import into your paper. You can't just claim that "honor does
play a role in *The Odyssey*" or that "Moli√®re does exploit comic
patterns in *Tartuffe*." After all, if the instructor has asked you to
discuss *how* Moli√®re used comic patterns, she presumably already
believes that he *did* use them. You get no credit for asserting the
existence of something we already know exists.

Instead, these assignments ask you to spend four or five pages
explaining the results of an analysis. Words such as "show how" and
"explain" and "illustrate" do *not* ask you to summarize a reading. They
ask you to show how the reading is put together*,* how it works. If you
asked someone to show you how your computer worked, you wouldn't be
satisfied if they simply summarized: "This is the keyboard, this is the
monitor, this is the printer." You already know the summary---now you
want to know how the thing does what it does. These assignments are
similar. They ask you to identify parts of things---parts of an
argument, parts of a narrative, parts of a poem; then show how those
parts fit together (or work against one another) to create some larger
effect.

But in the course of so doing, you can't just grind out four or five
pages of discussion, explanation, or analysis. It may seem strange, but
even when you're asked to "show how" or "illustrate," you're still
being asked to make an argument. You must shape and focus that
discussion or analysis so that it supports a ***claim*** that you
discovered and formulated and that all of your discussion and
explanation develops and supports. We'll talk more about claims ---
also known as points&emdash;in later sections.¬†¬†

A third kind of assignment is simultaneously least restrictive and most
intimidating. These assignments leave it up to you to decide not only
what you will claim but what you will write about and even what kind of
analysis you will do: "Analyze the role of a character in *The
Odyssey*." That is the kind of assignment that causes many students
anxiety because they must motivate their research almost entirely on
their own. To meet this kind of assignment, the best advice we can give
is to read with your mind open to things that puzzle you, that make you
wish you understood something better.

Now that advice may seem almost counterproductive; you may even think
that being puzzled or not understanding something testifies to your
intellectual failure. Yet almost everything we do in a university starts
with someone being puzzled about something, someone with a vague---or
specific---dissatisfaction caused by not knowing something that seems
important or by wanting to understand something better. The best place
to begin thinking about any assignment is with what *you* don't
understand but wish you did.

If after all this analysis of the assignment you are still uncertain
about what is expected of you, ask your instructor. If you can't find
your instructor, ask someone else in the class. If you can't find
someone else in your class, ask the writing lab or your SA for help.
**Do this as soon as possible**. You're not likely to succeed on an
assignment if you don't have a clear sense of what will count as
success. You don't want to spend time doing something different than
what you're being asked to do.

> ------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Another key feature of college writing: what's your point? 

However different your assignments may seem, most will share one
characteristic: in each, you will almost certainly be asked to make a
point. Now when we talk about the "point" of your paper, you should
understand what we do and do *not* mean. If asked what the point of
their paper is, most students answer with something like, "Well, I
wanted to write about the way Falstaff plays the role of Prince Hal's
father." But that kind of sentence names only your *topic* and an
*intention* to write *about* it.

When most of your instructors ask what the point of your paper is, they
have in mind something different. By "point" or "claim" (the words are
virtually synonymous with *thesis*), they will more often mean the most
important *sentence* that you wrote in your essay, a sentence that
appears on the page, in black in white; words that you can point to,
underline, send on a postcard; a sentence that sums up the most
important thing you want to say as a result of your reading, thinking,
research, and writing. In that sense, you might state the point of your
paper as "Well, I want to show/prove/claim/argue/demonstrate" (any of
those words will serve to introduce the point) that

> Though Falstaff seems to play the role of Hal's father, he is, in
> fact, acting more like a younger brother who . . . .

If you include in your paper what appears after *I want to prove that*,
then that's the point of your paper, its main claim that the rest of
your paper supports.

> ------------------------------------------------------------------------

### But what's a *good* point?

A question just as important as what a point is, though, is what counts
as a good one. We will answer that question here, even though it gets us
ahead of ourselves in describing the process of writing a paper. Many
beginning writers think that writing an essay means thinking up a point
or thesis and then finding evidence to support it. But few of us work
that way. Most of us begin our research with a question, with a puzzle,
something that we don't understand but want to, and maybe a vague sense
of what an answer might look like. We hope that out of our early
research to resolve that puzzle there emerges a solution to the puzzle,
an idea that seems promising, but one that only more research can test.
But even if more research supports that developing idea, we aren't
ready to say that *that* idea is our claim or point. Instead, we start
writing to see whether we can build an argument to support it,
suspecting, hoping that in the act of writing we will refine that idea,
maybe even change it substantially.

That's why we say we are getting ahead of ourselves in this account of
writing a paper, because as paradoxical as it may sound, you are
unlikely to know *exactly* what point you will make until *after* you
have written the paper in which you made it. So for us to talk about the
*quality* of a point now is to get ahead of ourselves, because we
haven't even touched on how you might think about drafting your paper,
much less revising it. But because everything you do at the beginning
aims at finding a good point, it is useful to have a clear idea about
what it is you are trying to find, what makes for a good point.

A good point or claim typically has several key characteristics: it says
something significant about what you have read, something that helps you
and your readers understand it better; it says something that is not
obvious, something that your reader didn't already know; it is at least
mildly contestable, something that no one would agree with just by
reading it; it asserts something that you can plausibly support in five
pages, not something that would require a book.

Measured by those criteria, these are *not* good points or claims:

-   "*1 Henry IV* by William Shakespeare is a play that raises questions
    about the nature of kingship and responsibility." Sounds impressive,
    but who would contest it? Everyone who has read the play already
    knows that it raises such questions.
-   "*Native Son* is one of the most important stories about race
    relations ever written." Again, your readers probably already agree
    with this, and if so, why would they read an essay that supported
    it? Further, are you ready to provide an argument that this point is
    true? What evidence could you provide to make this argument? Are you
    prepared to compare the effect of *Native Son* with the effects of
    other books about race relations?
-   "Socrates' argument in *The Apology* is very interesting." Right.
    So?
-   "In this paper I discuss Thucydides' account of the
    Corcyrean-Corinthian debate in Book I." First, what significant
    thing does this point tell us about the book? Second, who would
    contest this (who would argue that you are not going to discuss
    Thucydides' account?).

None of these is a particularly significant or contestable point, and so
none of them qualifies as a good one.

What does qualify as a good claim? These might:

-   The three most prominent women in *Heart of Darkness* play key roles
    in a complex system of parallels: literally as gatekeepers of
    Africa, representatively as gatekeepers of darkness, and
    metaphorically as gatekeepers of brutality.
-   While Freud argues that followers obey because each has a part of
    themselves invested in the leader, Blau claims that followers obey
    in order to avoid punishment. Both neglect the effects of external
    power.

You should recognize, however, that you will only rarely be able state
good points like these *before* you write your first draft. Much more
often, you *discover* good points at the end of the process of drafting.
Writing is a way of thinking through a problem, of discovering what you
want to say. So do not feel that you should begin to write only when you
have a fully articulated point in mind. Instead, write to discover and
to refine it.

One note on the language of point sentences. If you're like us, you
will want your readers to think that your points are terrifically
interesting and significant. What almost never accomplishes this is to
say: "My point is terrifically interesting and significant." Many
writers try to generate a sense of importance for what they write by
simply adding some synonym of the word "important:" "An important
question to consider . . ." "It is essential to examine . . ." "A
crucial concern is whether. . ." This isn't going to work. What
convinces readers that a point is important is not the word "important,"
but the words that tell us the substance of the point. If, during your
first draft, you find yourself using words like "important," you should
make a note to yourself to come back during your revisions to replace
"important" with more substantive language. Then don't forget to do it.
It's really important.

Now: in order to prove that important point&emdash;or to go through a
process that will help you develop one&emdash;you'll need a strategy for
gathering evidence and writing a first draft. We offer advice on these
matters in the next section: "[Preparing to write and drafting the
paper](writing-in-college-02.html)." ¬†
