---
layout: default
title: On teaching, learning, and grading
summary: SamR's perspectives on these topics.
---
Introduction
------------

I like to begin each course with a meta-commentary on teaching and
learning. Why? Because I care about the learning process, because I seem
to have a different teaching style and personality than some students
expect, and because I want you to think not just about *what* you are
learning, but also *how* you are learning.

From my perspective, you are here to learn and I am here to support that
learning. What will you be learning? The subject matter of the course,
certainly. However, I expect that (or hope that) you will also be
discovering new ways to think and learn or sharpening existing skills.
For example, in most of my courses I hope that you will develop your
collaboration skills and your "think on your feet" skills. In terms of
subject matter, I tend to care more about the processes and concepts
that you learn than about the "basic facts".

Learning is an interactive process. You learn by asking, discussing, and
answering questions, by playing with ideas and by working with others. I
know from experience that few topics can be learned passively: you need
to experiment with ideas (in your head, on paper, in discussion) in
order to fully grasp these ideas.

My role
-------

How do I try to support this learning? In a number of ways.

I *assign readings* to give you a basis for understanding the subject
matter. Sometimes these readings will be from the textbook, sometimes I
will distribute appropriate supplements.

I *lecture*, *lead discussions*, and *conduct recitations* on the topics
of the course. Sometimes these will be based on readings and
assignments, sometimes they will vary significantly from your readings.
Why? Because I feel it wastes your time and mine to simply reiterate the
readings. If you let me know that you're confused about a reading, I
will spend time going over that reading (either in person or in class).

To stimulate discussion and thinking, I regularly *call on students* in
class. I know that not all of you are comfortable answering questions
publicly, but I strongly believe that you need to try. Please feel free
to say "I'm not sure" when I call on you. At times, I'll step through
the class, asking each student in turn. At others, I'll call on you
individually. I tend to call more on students I interact with regularly.

I *assign work* because I find that most people learn by grounding
concepts in particular exercises that allow them to better explore the
details and implications of those concepts. I expect you to turn in work
on the day it is due and will impose severe penalties on late
assignments (including refusing to accept some late assignments).

Some of my assignments may involve *public presentation* of your work.
Sometimes, the best way to learn a topic is to have to discuss it or
present it to someone else. In addition, I've found that many students
need some work on their presentation skills. Most often, presentations
will be of papers that you've read.

**In general, I expect you to spend about fifteen hours per week on this
class outside of class time.** If you find that you are spending more
than that, let me know and I'll try to reduce the workload or find
ways for you to work more efficiently.

I *grade assignments* to help you identify some areas for improvement.
Note that I believe that you learn more from doing an assignment than
from receiving a grade on that assignment. This means that you may not
receive a grade or comments on all your assignments. I will tell you
when an assignment won't be graded, but not until after you hand it in.
I will do my best to be prompt about returning grades on assignments. At
times, I will use a grader to help speed the process.

I *build course webs* to organize my thoughts, to give you a resource
for learning, and to help those of you who need to work on your
note-taking skills. 

I *make myself available* to discuss problems and questions because I
know that some of you will need personal attention. In general, if I'm
in my office you should feel free to stop in. Most of the time, I'll be
willing to help. Once in a while, I'll be working on a project and will
ask you to come back later. Students always have first priority during
office hours. You should also feel free to send me electronic mail,
which I read regularly, and to call me.

At times, I *survey* my students to better understand how the class is
going. Because I do research on the effects of computers on learning, I
sometimes give surveys to gather data.

Grading
-------

At the same time that you learn and I try to help you learn, Grinnell
and the larger community expect me to assign a grade to your work in the
class. I base grades on a number of components, but primarily on
*assignments*, *examinations*, and *involvement in classroom
discussions*.

Because I understand that not everyone gets everything right the first
time, I will occasionally allow you to *redo* an assignment that you did
poorly on.

I will admit to a fairly strict grading scale. Grinnell notes that A and
A- represent exceptional work. To me, "exceptional" means going beyond
solid, acceptable, correct work. Exceptional work entails doing more
than is assigned or doing what is assigned particularly elegantly. Work
limited to mastery of the core materials is B-level work.

Your role
---------

How should you participate as a member of my class? (Or, how do you do
well in my class?) By being an active participant in your own learning.
In part, this means doing all the work for the class. It also means a
number of other things.

**Come talk to me** when you have questions or comments about subject
matter, work load, or how the course is going in general. I may also set
up an anonymous comment page for those who are uncomfortable talking to
me directly.

**Do the readings** in advance of each class period and come prepared
with a list of things that you don't understand. I will try to spend
time at the beginning of each class session answering these questions or
will restructure the lecture to accommodate them.

**Ask and answer questions and make comments** during class periods. I
consider active participation during class a particularly important part
of the learning process.

**Begin your assignments early**. Students who begin assignments early
have more opportunities to ask for help, to make sure that the
assignment gets completed, and to sleep at night. Such students also do
better in general.

Lecturing
---------

*Although I will rarely lecture in Tutorial, I thought it would still be
helpful for you to see my standard statement on lecturing.*  (It also
turns out that in the magic world of online classes, I end up lecturing
more than normal.)

I seem to have a different "lecturing" style than some students expect.
As I mentioned earlier, I don't think it is the purpose of lecture to
reiterate the readings. I do, however, think lecture and readings can
provide alternate perspectives on the subject matter. At times, I will
also discuss issues not covered in any readings.

I see no point in going on with a lecture or example if many students
don't understand what's going on. You are the first line of defense:
stop me when you are confused. In addition, I will occasionally stop the
class and ask for a show of hands to see who is confused. Don't be
embarrassed to raise your hand; if you are confused, it is likely that
someone else is also confused. I realize that this show of hands leads
to some "pressure for understanding". However, you won't get much out
of a class if you're confused (and therefore just copying down what
I'm writing without thinking about it).

I deem it important for students to be active participants in lecture.
This means that I will often ask you to help develop algorithms, solve
problems, and even critique each other's answers. If I call on you and
you're not sure of an answers, feel free to say "I don't know" or to
venture a guess. I consider it very important for all of us to see the
problem solving process, warts and all. Note that I often generate
examples of discussion "on the fly" so that we can all be involved in
the problem solving or development process.

Summary
-------

As the prior discussion suggests, I expect a great deal from my
students. I also use many different strategies to get the best out of
you. Feel free to discuss any of this with me (anything from concerns
about this perspective to suggestions on improving teaching and
learning).

